---
layout: post
title: Modulation formats for the 5G physical layer
excerpt: Energy conservation property
categories: blog
tags: [5G]
---

Abstract:

> 5G cellular communications promise to deliver the gigabit experience to mobile users, with a capacity increase of up to three orders of magnitude with respect to current LTE systems. There is widespread agreement that such an ambitious goal will be realized through a combination of innovative techniques involving different network layers. At the physical layer, the OFDM modulation format, along with its multiple-access strategy OFDMA, is not taken for granted, and several alternatives promising larger values of spectral efficiency are being considered. This paper provides a review of some modulation formats suited for 5G, enriched by a comparative analysis of their performance in a cellular environment, and by a discussion on their interactions with specific 5G ingredients. The interaction with a massive MIMO system is also discussed by employing real channel measurements.

The paper exposes the following modulation formats representable by the wireless signal model:

1. Classical OFDM and SC-FDMA
For downlink just as do current LTE systems, whereas for the uplink a peak-to-average power ratio (PAPR) limiting OFDM variant known as single-carrier FDMA (SC-FDMA) could be adopted.

2.  Filterbank multicarrier (FBMC)
An OFDM-like modulation format wherein subcarriers are passed through filters that suppress signals’ sidelobes, making them eventually bandlimited, thereby making it more spectrally efficient than OFDM. The use of FBMC for 5G cellular networks is mainly endorsed for its ability (due to signal bandlimitedness) to cope with network asynchronicity that naturally arises in the uplink and/or in the downlink with coordinated transmission, for its greater robustness to frequency misalignments among users when compared to OFDM, and for its more flexible exploitation of frequency white spaces in cognitive radio networks. FBMC is usually either coupled with QAM or with Offset-QAM (OQAM) modulation formats.

3.  Faster-than-Nyquist (FTN) / Time-frequency-packed (TFS) signaling.
Faster-than-Nyquist (FTN) signaling is a technique to increase the spectral efficiency of a communication system by introducing intentional interference among data symbols at the transmitter side.  FTN can exploit the excess bandwidth of the single carrier signal and the resulting multi-carrier extensions of FTN have also been named as Timefrequency- packed signaling (TFS).  More sophisticated arguments, inspired by time-frequency analysis, have highlight how these communication systems are based on Weyl-Heisenberg function sets, also known as Gabor sets, and as special cases of packing data on a Grassmannian manifold. Arguments on data packing theory, indicate that the best packing for these systems is obtained by hexagonal lattices, which provide some spectral efficiency gains with respect to rectangular, or staggered, lattices.

4.  Single-carrier modulation (SCM)
By adopting the cyclic prefix in order to provide an interblock interference free system and to convert the channel into a cyclic convolution, low complexity equalizers operating in the frequency domain can be exploited.


References
----------

[1] Banelli, P et al, [_"Modulation Formats and Waveforms for 5G Networks: Who Will Be the Heir of OFDM?: An overview of alternative modulation schemes for improved spectral efficiency"_](http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/xpl/articleDetails.jsp?arnumber=6923528), IEEE Signal Processing Magazine, Vol 31, Issue 6, Nov 2014.



